[Java] [XSUAA] Introduction & Usage (#276)
SAP/cloud-sdk: docs/java/guides/cf-xsuaa.md

---
id: cf-xsuaa
title: SAP Cloud Foundry
hide_title: false
hide_table_of_contents: false
sidebar_label: Cloud Foundry XSUAA Usage
custom_edit_url: https://github.com
description: Configure you Cloud Foundry CLI and bind it to SAP Cloud Platform
keywords:
- sap
- cloud
- sdk
- cloud native
- cloud sdk
- sap cloud sdk
- xsuaa
- destination
- connectivity
image:
---

> ## XSUAA Usage on Cloud Foundry

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## XSUAA Usage on SCP Cloud Foundry
```

> When implementing and deploying an application it quickly becomes important to understand how authentication and authorizations works on SCP Cloud Foundry.
> In our tutorials and documentation pages we recommend using "approuter" as proxy service to handle authentication management to your implemented application.
> The following steps will show what happens behind the scenes. The requests can be manually reproduced by a REST client of your choice, e.g. Postman or Insomnia.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When developing and deploying an application it quickly becomes important to understand how authentication and authorizations work on SCP Cloud Foundry.
In our tutorials and documentation, we recommend using "approuter" as a proxy service to handle authentication management to your implemented application.
The following steps will show what happens behind the scenes. The requests can be manually reproduced by a REST client of your choice, e.g. Postman or Insomnia.

```

> The [official UAA documentation](https://docs.cloudfoundry.org/api/uaa/) is highly recommended if there are questions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We highly recommend checking the [official UAA documentation](https://docs.cloudfoundry.org/api/uaa/) for any questions and comprehensive documentation on the topic.
```

> **Please note:** The following paragraphs only describe a subset of features of the XSUAA Service on Cloud Foundry.
> The Cloud SDK is not participating in the active development of this software and cannot give in-depth support.
> Some information may already be outdated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::note XSUAA service is developed independently of SAP Cloud SDK
The following documentation only touches a subset of features of the XSUAA Service on Cloud Foundry.
The Cloud SDK and XSUAA are developed independently. We do not provide in-depth support on XSUAA topics beyond Cloud SDK use cases. Mind, if some information seems outdated - get in touch with us and refer to [official XSUAA docs]((https://docs.cloudfoundry.org/api/uaa/)).
:::
```

> These are use cases described below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Cloud SDK handles the following use-cases:
```

Author: The Cloud SDK does not handle all those cases:

- [ ] User Login: `Authorization Code Grant` (approuter does it)
- [x] SCP Service Usage on behalf of a User: `JWT Bearer Token Grant`
- [x] SCP Service Usage on behalf of a service: `Client Credentials Grant`
- [ ] Resolve User Access Token: `Refresh Token Grant` (approuter does it)

> - User Login: `Authorization Code Grant`
> - SCP Service Usage on behalf of User: `JWT Bearer Token Grant`
> - SCP Service Usage on behalf of service: `Client Credentials Grant`
> - Resolve User Access Token: `Refresh Token Grant`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- User Login: `Authorization Code Grant`
- SCP Service Usage on behalf of a User: `JWT Bearer Token Grant`
- SCP Service Usage on behalf of a service: `Client Credentials Grant`
- Resolve User Access Token: `Refresh Token Grant`
```

### Read the Application Properties  

In order to create a request, we need to parse the XSUAA connection data.

> 1. First, take note of your "_application route_", that's the URL for which an authorization request will be constructed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Take note of your "_application route_". That's the URL for which an authorization request will be built.
```

> 1. Open the **system-provided** environment variables of your application on Cloud Foundry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Open the **system-provided** environment variables of your application on Cloud Foundry.
```

Reviewer 2: Actually having the `1.` everywhere makes sense. That way you don't have to edit anything when adding or deleting steps.

> 1. In the JSON value, locate the object `VCAP_SERVICES.xsuaa[0].credentials`.
>    
>    *Note:* Depending on the scenario, the "xsuaa" array may have more than one entry. Your application can be bound to multiple instances, e.g. through different service plans.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Extract values "_url_", "_clientid_", "_clientsecret_" from the JSON value, locate in the object `VCAP_SERVICES.xsuaa[0].credentials`.
   
:::tip
Depending on your setup, the `xsuaa` array may have more than one entry. Because your application can be bound to multiple instances, e.g. through different service plans.
:::
```

> 1. Extract values "_url_", "_clientid_", "_clientsecret_".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Authorization Code Grant

> Since we start without previous access token, we begin our journey with the browser flow of [Authorization Code Grant](https://docs.cloudfoundry.org/api/uaa/version/74.23.0/index.html#authorization-code-grant).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since we start without an existing access token, our journey begins with the browser flow of [Authorization Code Grant](https://docs.cloudfoundry.org/api/uaa/version/74.23.0/index.html#authorization-code-grant).
```

> The following action is split into two steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This flow is split into two steps: 
```

> - Get authorization code on behalf of single-sign-on login form.
> - Get personal access token from authorization code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Get authorization code on behalf of a single-sign-on login form.
- Get personal access token from authorization code.
```

### Get Authorization Code

> You will likely need to run the following request in your browser and monitor the HTTP response.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will likely need to run the following HTTP request in your browser and check the HTTP response.
```

> 1. Request:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. HTTP Request example:
```

    ```
    GET https://[xsuaa.url]/oauth/authorize
    
    Query parameters:
    
    client_id=[xsuaa.clientid]
    redirect_uri=[application.route]
    response_type=code
    ```

>     (optional values can be set for "scope" and "login_hint")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::tip
Optional values can be set for "scope" and "login_hint"
:::
```

> 1. Submit login form via browser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Submit login form via a browser or REST API debugging tools like POSTMAN or Insomnia.
```

Author: I doubt this works with postman / insomnia, because this step requires a real user session and likely cookie support (for single-sign-on). IMHO this is harder to describe than just telling the reader: use the browser.

> 2. Read HTTP response:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Check the HTTP response and extract `[code]` from `Location` header.
```

    ```
    HTTP/1.1 302 Found
    Strict-Transport-Security: max-age=31536000
    Set-Cookie: X-Uaa-Csrf=[...]; Path=/; Max-Age=86400; Expires=[...]; HttpOnly
    Cache-Control: no-store
    Content-Language: en
    Location: [application.route]?code=[code]
    X-XSS-Protection: 1; mode=block
    X-Frame-Options: DENY
    X-Content-Type-Options: nosniff
    ```

> 1. Extract `[code]` from `Location` header.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

### Get OAuth2 Access Token

With the authorization code we can now request a real access token from the OAuth2 service endpoint:

> 1. Request:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Make the following `Request`:
```

    ```
    POST https://[xsuaa.url]/oauth/token
    
    Headers
    Accept: application/json
    Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded
   
    client_id=[xsuaa.clientid]
    client_secret=[xsuaa.clientsecret]
    redirect_uri=[application.route]
    code=[code]
    grant_type=authorization_code
    ```

> 1. Response:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Check the `Response`:
```

    ```
    {
      "access_token": [access_token],
      "token_type": "bearer",
      "id_token": [...],
      "refresh_token": [refresh_token],
      "expires_in": [...],
      "scope": [...],
      "jti": [...]
    }
    ```

>    Congratulation, you have a valid `access_token`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Congratulation, now you've fetched a valid `access_token`.
```

>    It can be further evaluated and forwarded.

Reviewer: This should be made more obvious. I don't fully get it.

>    Some applications like _approuter_ will save the `refresh_token` to the user session.
>    This leverages the automatic retrieval of new access tokens, if the previous ones have expired during the active session.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::tip
   Some applications like _approuter_ will save the `refresh_token` to the user session for you.
   This enables automatic retrieval of new access tokens after the existing one has expired during the active session.
:::
```

## JWT Bearer Token Grant

Several services on SCP Cloud Foundry require a dedicated OAuth2 access token, e.g. _Connectivity Service_ and _Destination Service_.

1. Open the **system-provided** environment variables of your application.

> 1. In the JSON value, locate the object `VCAP_SERVICES.destination[0].credentials`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. In the JSON value, locate the object `VCAP_SERVICES.destination[0].credentials`. Make note of `clientid`, `clientsecret`, `uri`
```

> 1. Read "clientid", "clientsecret", "uri".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 1. Request:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Make the following `Request`:
```

    ```
    POST https://[xsuaa.url]/oauth/token
    
    Headers
    Accept: application/json
    Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded
   
    client_id=[destination.clientid]
    client_secret=[destination.clientsecret]
    assertion=[access_token]
    grant_type=urn:ietf:params:oauth:grant-type:jwt-bearer
    response_type=token
    ```

> 1. Response:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Check the `Response`:
```

    ```
    {
      "access_token": [destination_access_token],
      "token_type": "bearer",
      "expires_in": [...],
      "scope": [...],
      "jti": [...]
    }
   ```

>    Congratulation, you have a valid `destination_access_token`.
>    It can be used to query the `destination.uri` linked destination service on behalf of the current user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Congratulation, you have a valid `destination_access_token`.
   It can be used to query the `destination.uri` linked to destination service on behalf of the current user.
```

## Client Credentials Grant

> Some applications require access to a platform service without an active user sessions, with _technical user_ credentials.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some applications require access to a platform service without active user sessions. This requires credentials known as _technical user_ credentials.
```

> For example, reading a list of destinations does not require a user access token.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, reading a list of `destinations` does not require a `user access token`.
```

> Instead we can request an access token on behalf of the service binding itself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead, we can request an `access token` on behalf of the service binding itself.
```

> Here we use the [Client Credentials Grant](https://docs.cloudfoundry.org/api/uaa/version/74.23.0/index.html#without-authorization).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the example below, we'll use the [Client Credentials Grant] (https://docs.cloudfoundry.org/api/uaa/version/74.23.0/index.html#without-authorization) to get `access token`.
```

> 1. Request:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Make a `Request`:
```

    ```
    POST https://[xsuaa.url]/oauth/token
    
    Headers
    Accept: application/json
    Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded
   
    client_id=[destination.clientid]
    client_secret=[destination.clientsecret]
    grant_type=client_credentials
    ```

> 1. Response:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Check the `Response`:
```

    ```
    {
      "access_token": [destination_access_token],
      "token_type": "bearer",
      "expires_in": [...],
      "scope": [...],
      "jti": [...]
    }
    ```
   Congratulation, you have a valid `destination_access_token`.

>    It can be used to query the `destination.uri` linked destination service on behalf of the service binding itself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   It can be used to query the `destination.uri` linked destination service on behalf of the service binding.
```

   
   
## Refresh Token Grant

> If the current access token is expired, a new one can be requested with the [Refresh Token](https://docs.cloudfoundry.org/api/uaa/version/74.23.0/index.html#refresh-token).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the current access token is expired, a new one can be requested with the [Refresh Token flow](https://docs.cloudfoundry.org/api/uaa/version/74.23.0/index.html#refresh-token).
```

> 1. Request:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Make a `Request`:
```

    ```
    POST https://[xsuaa.url]/oauth/token
    
    Headers
    Accept: application/json
    Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded
   
    client_id=[xsuaa.clientid]
    client_secret=[xsuaa.clientsecret]
    refresh_token=[refresh_token]
    grant_type=refresh_token
    ```

> 1. Response:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2.Check the `Response`:
```

    ```
    {
      "access_token": [access_token],
      "token_type": "bearer",
      "id_token": [...],
      "refresh_token": [refresh_token],
      "expires_in": [...],
      "scope": [...],
      "jti": [...]
    }
    ```

>    Congratulation, you have a refreshed `access_token`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Congratulation, you now have a refreshed `access_token`.
```

---
id: cf-xsuaa
title: SAP Cloud Foundry
hide_title: false
hide_table_of_contents: false
sidebar_label: Cloud Foundry XSUAA Usage
custom_edit_url: https://github.com

> description: Configure you Cloud Foundry CLI and bind it to SAP Cloud Platform

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
description: Understand how the XSUAA service on Cloud Foundry works
```

keywords:
- sap
- cloud
- sdk
- cloud native
- cloud sdk
- sap cloud sdk
- xsuaa
- destination
- connectivity
image:
---

> ## XSUAA Usage on SCP Cloud Foundry

Reviewer 2: I think we should make it more prominent that this guide is completely unrelated to the Cloud SDK. We don't want users to think that they have to do all of these things when using the SDK. 

So maybe use a headline like `Background knowledge on Authorization & Authentication`. And a prominent note that the Cloud SDK handles all these things and this is  mostly FYI.
